=====================
Chocolate Keen Dreams
=====================

This is a port of Keen Dreams, which aims to reproduce behaviors of original
executables for DOS, including bugs, at least if it's not too difficult
(e.g., anything that highly depends on the memory layout).

Note that there may still be some differences from vanilla Keen. As of
this version, you don't need to execute a separate "START" file in order
to play from a shareware release. But you can emulate the behaviors of
skipping this in the original release, i.e., get a message telling you
should type START, by adding the /detour command line argument, e.g.,
typing "chocolate-kdreams-shar113.exe /detour" in a command prompt on Windows.
This is, by the way, the exact opposite of the behaviors of the original.

This port consists of four executables, each of them being compatible with
a different version of Keen Dreams. The original releases supported by the
port, using source codes for them, are Shareware (EGA) v1.13, CGA v1.05,
Registered (EGA) v1.93 and Shareware (EGA) v1.20.

Note that this port does not come with a copy of the game, which is required.
As of today (October 11 2014) you can download the Shareware release, v1.13,
from one of a few places online, at the least. A couple of links for reference:

http://cd.textfiles.com/megagames2/GAMES/APOGEE/KEENDR13.ZIP
http://dukeworld.duke4.net/classic%20dukeworld/share/keendm.zip

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Based on the README.md file of the original Keen Dreams source code release
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

This port is released under the GNU GPLv2+.  See LICENSE for more details.

The release of the source code does not affect the licensing of the game data
files, which you must still legally acquire.  This includes the static data
included in this repository for your convenience.  However, you are permitted
to link and distribute that data for the purposes of compatibility with the
original game.

The original source code release was made possible by a crowdfunding effort.
It is brought to you by Javier M. Chavez and Chuck Naaden with additional
support from:

* Dave Allen
* Kirill Illenseer
* Michael Jurich
* Tom Laermans
* Jeremy Newman
* Braden Obrzut
* Evan Ramos
* Sam Schultz
* Matt Stath
* Ian Williams
* Steven Zakulec
* et al

-----------------
Some more credits
-----------------

* sulix, for a hint about memory wrapping, as well as having earlier experience
with him in general. Also done research on Keen.
* adurdin, quantumg, keenrush, levellord, levellass and lemm for their
research works.
* Caitlin Shaw for CloneKeen, a reimplementation of Keen 1-3.
* gerstrong for Commander Genius, containing a few engines used as
reimplementations of Keen 1-3 and Keen 4-6. Originally started
as a branch of CloneKeen known as CloneKeenPlus.

* Apologizes to anybody not mentioned here who deserves a credit. Guess I can
say to all of you, that you should be considered special here. :)

------------------------------
Why are CGA graphics supported
------------------------------

Since there were originally releases compatible with the CGA, and we have the
source code(s) for these, then why not support these?
In fact, CGA graphics were supported before EGA in this port.

As a possible preparation for Commander Keen 4-6, some engine code considered
to be shared with these was originally ported from the Catacomb 3D source code
(https://github.com/FlatRockSoft/Catacomb3D), with no actual testing.
CGA routines were preferred, given possible complications with the EGA
bit planes and multiple read/write modes. While Catacomb 3D is EGA-only,
this assisted with the porting of Keen Dreams CGA later.

--------------
Current status
--------------

- The mouse can be used for control panel navigation, while the keyboard is
usable basically everywhere.
- Basic joystick support is in, although it's kind-of similar to the DOS days
so it doesn't remind of more recent titles.
- AdLib and PC Speaker sound emulations are built-in.
AdLib emulation is possible thanks to the DBOPL emulator from DOSBox.
- CGA/EGA graphics and text mode emulations (on an emulated VGA adapter)
are in.
- Game is playable using a 64-bit Linux executable (tested on Ubuntu 14.04),
as well as a 32-bit Windows executable, but it hasn't yet been entirely tested.
New non-vanilla bugs are possible!
- There should be compatibility with the configuration file as generated by the
original DOS executable, but this hasn't been tested.
- Saved game compatibility is implemented per game release separately
(e.g., the CGA executable should be compatible with Keen Dreams CGA v1.05),
but there can still be some new non-vanilla bugs.

---------------
Making this run
---------------

This requires one of the following releases: Keen Dreams Shareware v1.13,
CGA v1.05, Registered v1.93, Shareware v1.20.

For the Shareware release, v1.13, you should simply drop the files SDL2.dll and
chocolate-kdreams-shar113.exe along with the files coming with this Shareware
release (v1.13), and then launch chocolate-kdreams-shar113.exe.

You should be able to find a copy of the Shareware release online.
Check download links at the top of this README file for reference.

Similarly, chocolate-kdreams-cga105.exe should be used if playability of
the CGA release (v1.05) is desired.

Other versions should be supported in a similar manner. Note that v1.20
hasn't been widely available so far, although it is briefly mentioned in
the Apogee FAQ. Furthermore, based on the source codes release the differences
between v1.13, v1.93 and v1.20 are quite small, and the two releases of v1.20
and v1.93 share the same static game data (e.g., common EGA and map headers).

------------------------------------------------
How to do *this and that* or: Configuration file
------------------------------------------------

On first launch of Chocolate Keen Dreams, a configuration file
named chocolate-keen-dreams.cfg should be generated. You can
edit it to fit your needs. Currently available settings:
- "fullscreen" toggle. Value should be either "true" or "false".
- "fullres" for fullscreen window resolution. By default the value is "0x0",
implying desktop resolution, but it can be any other (but supported)
specific resolution, say (under some setups) "1024x768".
- "windowres" is similar, but for non-fullscreen windows. The default of "0x0"
refers to dimensions which are kind-of proportional to the desktop's.
- "displaynum" may be useful if you have multiple monitors,
but it's totally untested as of now.
- "sdlrenderer" lets you pick software rendering if you wish. Value should be
"auto" for hardware accelerated rendering (if supported) and "software"
for the other choice.
Note: Technically at least one more value should be acceptable,
but the values given above probably suffice for now.
- "vsync" lets you toggle Sync to VBlank. Valid values are "auto", "off", "on".
The default of "auto" implies "off" with CGA graphics and "on" with EGA, since
these probably represent the behaviors of the original releases with a real
CGA/EGA/VGA.
- "bilinear" toggles bilinear filtering. Valid values are "true" and "false".
If set to "true", consider taking a look at the "scalefactor" setting.
- "scaletype" can be used to toggle aspect ratio correction. Good e.g.,
in case screen burn-in is a concern. Valid values are "aspect" and "fill".
- "scalefactor" can be used for two-step scaling. When different from 1, and
with "bilinear=true", on compatible hardware the game's graphical contents to
be displayed should first be zoomed in each dimension by the given scale
factor, and then the zoomed pic should be scaled to the window with bilinear
filtering applied. This is done so scaling artifacts coming from non-bilinear
interpolation are less noticeable, while the output is not too blurry.
- "autolock" tells if the window should have full control of the mouse
(setting has no effect for fullscreen windows). Even if disabled, the cursor
should be hidden while in the middle of the window. Valid values are "true"
and "false".
- "sndsamplerate" lets you specify a sound sample rate (in Hz). Currently,
the default is 49716, which is close to the rate of OPL chips generating AdLib
sounds. It's also more efficient, as no interpolation is required,
since the rate of 49716Hz is used for AdLib emulation internally.

--------------------
There is some bug...
--------------------

This is still new, and bugs tend to happen in the porting process.
But, if it's rather a bug found in the original game which is reproduced,
most chances are it won't be fixed, since Chocolate Keen Dreams aims to
preserve behaviors of original releases, including bugs.

-----------------------------------------------
Building Chocolate Keen Dreams from the sources
-----------------------------------------------

- Development files for SDL 2.0 are required, as well as GNU make and the
GNU Compiler Collection's C compiler (i.e. gcc). In practice, at the moment
only "make" and "gcc" are probably required. If nothing goes wrong, a
single "make" command should build four executables, one for each original
supported version of Keen Dreams for DOS.
"make clean" removes any generated object or executable file, assuming
the *exact* same arguments have been passed to "make" as before,
with the exception of the "clean" argument.
- It is possible to build just one executable by going through a
specific Makefile, e.g., "make -f Makefile.cga".
- MinGW can be used as well (tested on Linux). If you try to cross-compile
then you may wish to set PLATFORM=WINDOWS and BINPREFIX accordingly.

---------
Changelog
---------

Oct 11, 2014 (v0.8.10):
- Fixed finale text printing (more generally, modified some functions
to better handle original code leading to undefined behaviors per the
C standard, or at least to crashes).
- Fixed King Boobus Tuber explosion.
- Added compatibility with the registered release, v1.93, and the Shareware
release, v1.20. Taking a look at the source codes release, they are both
almost identical to v1.13.
- Overscan borders are drawn now, even if permanently colored black (MM_SortMem
flashes the borders, but chances are the function is never called in practice).
- More miscellaneous fixes.

Oct 9, 2014 (v0.8.8):
- EGA graphics emulation has been added, and Chocolate Keen Dreams should be
compatible with the Shareware release of Keen Dreams, version 1.13.
- This includes compatibility with saved games (each Chocolate Keen exe should
be compatible with saved games of the corresponding release for DOS only).
- Two separate executables are used for the CGA and Shareware releases.
- chocolate-keen-dreams-cga.exe has been renamed to the shorter filename of
chocolate-kdreams-cga.exe. There's also chocolate-kdreams-shar.exe now.
- Difference from behaviors of vanilla Keen: For the Shareware release,
you don't need to select a "START" executable in order to launch the game.
But you can still get the message telling you need to type START by adding the
command-line argument of /detour (exact opposite of original behaviors).
- High scores table glitch is fixed.
- Other miscellaneous fixes.

Oct 3, 2014 (v0.8.2):
- Bilinear filtering can now be toggled on if hardware acceleration is in use.
- In case off-screen rendering is supported, it can be used for two-step
scaling of the graphical output: First nearest-neighbor interpolation with
the added "scalefactor" setting, and then bilinear.
- Sync to VBlank can be manually toggled now (if supported on the used setup).
By default "vsync=auto" is used, currently implying "off" (with CGA graphics).
- Live sound interpolation has been implemented, and it's possible to specify
a different sound sample rate, while the rate used for OPL emulation is still
49716Hz. Currently 49716 is the default value
- Fixed a bug: One cfg setting or more not written to file when it's expected.
- As of this version, the cfg file is (re)written on launch. This is done so
new settings can appear in the file if it's not up-to-date.

Sep 29 2014 (v0.8.1):
- Compatibility with saved games from vanilla Keen Dreams CGA v1.05 is in. As expected, it can still be buggy (in fact, vanilla Keen also has its limits/bugs with this).
- As a possibly indirect consequence, a vanilla Keen bug in StateMachine/DoActor leading to a crash in Chocolate Keen Dreams has been found (NULL pointer dereference). Workaround is applied now.
- The environment variables from last release are gone. Instead, you should have the configuration file chocolate-keen-dreams.cfg to fiddle with (created on launch if it doesn't exist).
- Custom fullscreen and windowed resolutions can be set in the configuration file. Furthermore, aspect correction can be toggled off (e.g., in case screen burn-in is a concern).
- Mouse cursor lock can be toggled off (from the cfg). By default the cursor is now unlocked in a non-fullscreen window. Chances are the behaviors may still feel a bit off, but at least we have that.
- Loading window with bars should display (while loading a map), although it's shown for about a short moment on sufficiently fast machines.

Sep 26 2014 (v0.8.0):
- Initial release, based on Keen Dreams CGA v1.05. Should be playable with
sound effects and CGA graphics on Linux and Windows desktops. Game saving and
more is totally untested and may be incompatible with original data generated
by the corresponding DOS executable (saved games are known to be incompatible).

NY00123
